---
layout: post
title: Real Humble Beginnings
subtitle: Lab 1 

gh-repo: Digit-ALI/Digit-Ali.github.io
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [labs]
comments: true
---

Description of Lab 1: We created our websites and repositories on Github.com. I learned some basic steps for creating a website, such as selecting a theme, forking my repository to Github, and understanding the main branch and its components. Here in the interface, I changed titles under _ Config.yml, learned code to make headers and subheaders. Going through these processes, put into perspective the plaint text HTML that is behind many websites. I think this was the most empowering part of the lesson. While I am new to coding and DH studies, making something feels great and encourages me to use these tools in research. What is also striking about working in the repository is seeing your progress, edits, and errors. The repository allows one to keep track of your progress effortlessly, which is great for reflection and seeing how you learn. Also, knowing the proper vocabulary for things will be beneficial as I progress through the labs. Nothing was complicated per se; however, I was getting an error message due to my title being wrong, so I inserted double quotes to fix the issue. 

This week's discussed readings challenged my thinking about the intersections of digital humanities and historical scholarship by examining what is "data" and its evolution over the past centuries. I was challenged to think about how previous historical actors, such as ship captains, kept logs or how plantation owners kept track of the number of enslaved people they owned. Those recordings are all data, however, "The concept of data specific to electronic computing is a 20th-century phenomenon, but data itself was used for millennia, perhaps without our understanding of this newer concept." (Rosenberg) While understanding data's evolutionary process is essential to the etymology and origins, the question of "what is data" still loomed. Rosenberg's article carefully engaged with how we understand data by deconstructing how it comes to exist and what it is used for when providing information.

The Rosenberg article provided an example of how many times the word "data" appeared in text over time. The chart ranged from 1700 to 1990, showing the increase in the use of the term. However, it declined, which made me question its usage after 1990. The decline reflected the number of books being scanned. It was not that people were not using the word data. Rosenberg urges scholars to ask: what is the data behind the graph? And why is it recorded? We cannot assume that "data" was not used before 1880 because we do not have the data (representation) to validate that claim. He reasoned that in the 18th century, data was a Latin word, and by the 19th-century, data had become more common in the English language, thus it appears. Those who use data, scholars, or historians should beware that data is not factual in and of itself but is rhetorical because data is representative of what is recorded. The Google books graph guided my thinking about data, who recorded it, why and how—and what is being represented? There had to be silences or gaps in data, just like the archival records. Therefore by "googling" or searching, the data allows us to see what is there but also what is not there. 
 
One of my goals for this course is to understand how I can use data to illuminate my research projects in history. I am working on black colonization movement to Liberia in the early nineteenth century. This history of African American emigration is fleeting, overlooked, and underrepresented in the field of history. If I can create something, perhaps a map, or use DH as a storytelling tool, I can shed light on an area I believe is essential to understanding the Early Republic. Because I am working with black voices, the documentation in the record is scarce. I need different tools and methods to alleviate some of that silence, and by using data along with archival methods and theory, black voices can be brought forth through this process. I want to begin using DH as a supplement to my future research projects and possibly my dissertation. 
