Question One: If I change stop words to none, it will count irrelavent words: to, of, and, the, that, with, in, a, are (we have no use for these words—they are common) Changing stop word to none removed of the relevant terms that would give me an idea of what these documents were about. 

Question Two: Raw counted how many times a term is mentioned. The frequency of the term Student per million is (8/16), this word was used more in proportion to all the other words in the corpus as whole. MCAS was high in the raw and frequency. However, Student isn’t used as frequently relative to the million. MCAS is used more frequently within a paragraph, but then there is no more mention in another area where it is used, whereas student is steadier and in every other document or paragraph. Therefore, frequency shows how many times a term appears in a given document across a corpus. 

Question Three: MCAS is the most significant according to the TF-IDF score. I see that relativity and significance are most alike; they provide more of a context of what subject and person is important to these documents. MCAS stood for Morrissey College of Arts and
Sciences. This document displayed the Honors Program and those who were notified via email that the program would be terminated—alumni, professor, and students at MCAS.

Question Four: The terms that occurred most in the humanities corpus were terms where people/subjects: humanities and students. Whereas the science document frequented terms related to research more such as cancer or chloroplast. It seems that the humanities corpus displayed who was involved in a project or their relationship to humanities research. The science corpus was less about the relationship between the people and their work, and mor focused on cancer or plant cell research. 


Question Five: I used cirrus to look at terms and see how they chart across the corpus. Word trends allow for me to break the corpus down into equal segments and it displays the frequency of words and where the words are in phrases, which provided more context. I selected humanities and research, as terms, to see how much they are used in tandem, but they were most times used apart from one another. I decided to use the humanities corpus to see how terms were linked to other popular words which was helpful because it displayed the relationship between them. Lastly, I used the links tool, which showed me that Voyant or text analysis is a great method for a deep reading for quantitative analysis.
Voyant exceeded my expectation with how clearly you can see trends and quickly. This would be so useful to my research on colonization and slavery. I could quickly see how historians are characterizing colonization and in which sections, the relationship between the two, and if slavery and colonization are used in tandem. This would save time in writing about historiography because I could pair two texts together to see how they match and diverge. I would like to know if you could understand sentiments or attitudes from text? Is there a tool for that? One can see the quantitative side but as a digital humanist I am interest in the qualitative assessment as well. 

Working this week with Voyant aligned with my week 4 experience when working with the post45 dataset. Voyant was an exploratory experience, where the tools helped me to see what may be relevant to a possible question using text analysis, but working with this interface was more intimidating because I wasn’t sure what to make of the corpus itself. However, I recall reading in the Data Feminism chapter 6 reading how context matters. Voyant was a great tool to see what terms were used in the Corpora frequently and in relation to the subject. However, one would still need the context tool to see what this really means. For example, MCAS was frequently used in a certain section of the corpus but in context it had no real mean other than it was the title of a university. I think this was a great example of how data is sometime just data, and you must read and investigate to discover the meaning of documents. This process seems to reveal the more quantitative side of DH work, which can be useful for getting work done quickly or needing the numbers on a particular topic, but it is only a starting point or a point for research that needs additional supplmentation. 


