Lab 3: Using regular expressions this week was a new learning curve. I will post my process at the bottom to show I came about some of my findings. In tandem, the readings this week were pertinent to my thinking about data, how it is used and the process of documentation. The Julia Flanders and Fotis Jannidis reading on "Data Modeling" reinforced the idea that there is really no easy way out of creating your own data set. As I was working with RegEx, I kept thinking there must be some formula I could paste in here to capture all the characters I need. I admit I did google and look, but nothing helped. I was moderately successful, but it came with the age-old process of trial and error. I realized in working with data specific to your research or problem, it's best to work through it the best you can and record your process as you move through it. The "Data Modeling" reading stated that  "realizing the informational potential represented by existing formalizable models, such as the critical apparatus, or the structure of a dictionary entry... which possess all of the qualities requisite for formalization: a clearly defined set of informational items with clearly defined relationships." Our assignment needed a data model to fit specifically what we were trying to do: figure out what regex would convert these titles into a standard pattern, thus cleaning the data. Therefore, I began working through the set to see what worked. Other things got messed up, and some things worked. I am not sure what would work to organize and clean this data yet. 
One of the most important steps through this trial and error was  Keeping track of progress. I related this to my work in history; how you progress through a problem you want to solve is just as important as the conclusion or answer. This is comparable to historiography, demonstrating how historians and scholars have written about a topic over time. Therefore allowing new scholars to find gaps and overlooked silences. Just as in data, humanists care more about the differences (silence/gaps). "Humanistic data is strongly layered: the artifacts modeled in digital humanities are created with a purpose by identifiable agents and have a history that is part of their identity, and they then undergo further processes of curation whose intentions and methods need to be kept visible." I think that we as digital humanist should document our process so that they can assist in problem solving, help to answer questions, or highlight new questions useful to digital research.

Reg Ex Process:
1.	I realized that adding a space means that I need to press the space bar to add to the list of matching characters.
2.	Getting all characters covered required adding all punctuation to the sequence but still haven’t separated sequence from publisher. ([A-Za-z0-9 ;() ,.])+
3.	Couldn’t figure it out and I started taking things out. However removing the semicolon for the expression worked to make a separate column. ([A-Za-z0-9 () ,.])+ (removed ;) accidentally did this   Most of figuring things out was by trial and error.
4.	(.*?); This captured everything except city and state
5.	(.*?);(.*) This separated city and state from publisher. 
6.	(.*?); ?(.*)* At this point all characters match the pattern
7. (.*?); ?(.*?) (.*?) attempted to create match group but couldnt match all cases.

Exhausted!
