Alison McCann
Final Project

Digital Letters from Liberia 1830-1940: A Dataset 

	The Black Colonization movement in the early American Republic was a small-scale migration of thousands of African Americans leaving the United States to live in Liberia, Africa. From 1830 to 1940, thousands of letters from Liberia were sent home to their families, previous enslavers and other familial or kinship networks they had or created. This dataset consists of small number of letters collected from Bell I. Wiley’s Slaves No More and also from letters collected from archival visits that may or may not be included in Wiley’s work.   While these letters are foundational for histories on the social fabric and making of the American colony, the data within them allude to larger questions and meanings of the colonization movement. This essay responds to the data specifics of the black digital letters: sender names, dates, location, intent of letter and other information that can be gleaned from a distant reading of data. How can examining the data specifics of African American letters from Liberia contribute to the study of the early Republic? 
	The data collection process consists of reading each letter to fill in the metadata fields for this set. For example: sender name, date, receiver, and American city where the sender is from, are found in most letters although many are inconsistent within the archival documents. Briefly, names are critical because sometimes the same person sends multiple letters, city is crucial because it highlights that many emigres came from a concentrated area that alludes to the establishment of Liberian enclaves. These specifics are what is most important to the data, while many histories are concerned with the qualitative methods of reading and interrogating the letters, a quantitative data incentive helps scholars to make connections that otherwise may be missed. Because all knowledge is situated within the context of the specific history one is researching, I approached collecting this data by thinking of qualitative and quantitative methods in tandem, hopefully having one fuel the other. “When approaching any new source of knowledge, whether it be a dataset or dinner menu (or a dataset of dinner menus), it’s essential to ask questions about the social, cultural, historical, institutional, and material conditions under which that knowledge was produced, as well as about the identities of the people who created it.”   Therefore, it was important to arrange my data in a manner that helped my research and hopefully other scholars make connections. In my own research I decided that the most important fields should be those that highlight the sparsely documented African Americans writing the letters, the date, the American city (receiver) and familial name (connection). When arranged in this manner I was able to see connections more clearly and I began to ask bigger questions of my research. For example, the date and city alluded that a significant number of emigres came from Virginia around the same time in 1842. This made me think about the construction of the colony and its influences from American cities. With few photos from the era, one could see that some of the homes built in the town resembled a colonial style seen in Richmond. The arrangement of the metadata fields is important for seeing some the larger connections between empire and colony. 
	Much of the scholarship on black colonization has been limited to the white-organized efforts of the American colonization society (ACS) and local state manumission societies. Traditionally, scholars have focused on this period by examining how national conversations about free blacks in early America originated and evolved. These historians have taken almost a purely qualitative approach to this area. The role of the ACS in the emigration of free and emancipated blacks to Africa dominates the literature and gives primacy to white agents in colonization.   A digital turn for examining the letters of the emigres highlights some of the technical or logistical elements prevalent in the Liberian settlement. With many black settlers coming from the American South, did some of the settlement’s resemble a social hierarchy that can be traced to Charleston, South Carolina? The dataset can help scholars quickly make these connections and provide an estimate number from the letters. While there are charts from economic historians that look to the American regionality of this movement, they lock black settlers into a silo of numbers without the qualitative aspect. A digital humanist combines both to provide a richer and more profound understanding of this era. Recent scholarship has redirected this field by encouraging a deeper analysis of colonization's actions, implications, and results, but still lacks the black migrant perspective. Digitally analyzing these letters not only provides a wider access to them but centers black agency and voices. 
	There are limits to this dataset which are largely confined to the correspondences. Black emigres wrote to family and those they held connections within the United States, however, almost none of those correspondences from those in America have been located. Having those returning letters could have alluded to the larger inter-Atlantic networks made by black emigres. My research broadly questions the relationship between American imperialism, black identity, and citizenship in the early nineteenth century, and attempts to re-center the black colonization movement, black settlers, and their lived experience in Liberia within a larger story of the American empire. The missing letters (data) would provide my digital scholarship with specific locations (cities or regions) to highlight how far and wide settlers’ connections were and answer questions around black pre-and post-migration experiences. Thus, this dataset will consist of a one-way correspondence coming from the colony. 
	Another inconsistency within the data that comes mostly from reading who the letters are addressed to is the previous status of the black emigres. “Previous status” is one of the metadata fields, while some of the letters are telling most are not. There is a particular group of letters from the Skipwith family, 1833-1858, who migrated from Virginia to Liberia that is filled with rich statistical information: specific dates, previous status, number of family members who sojourned, estimate number of family members left on plantation, education, and great deal of significant intent (why they were writing). While letters like this provide the best and most data for my dataset, they are rare. The father Peyton Skipwith’s letters are some of the most detailing letters known to the colonization movement and provide a model candidate for the metadata fields. As one reads through the letters, fields are created, which can sometimes add more texture or even possible silences, because it is rare that the amount of detail will be prevalent in others letters. A significant field that specifically came from reading the Skipwith family letters was the education level. Some of the letters are written poorly due to the lack of education, reading and writing, taught to enslaved blacks. However, Skipwith’s writing, thoughts, and desires allude to having been educated by his previous enslaver. His letter’s intent surround economic and social data, Skipwith was concerned with building a proper colony, one that worked with the United States, engaged in trade with not only America but England as well, had schools, and a sense of social structure with a lower laboring class, middle and elite. Therefore, in model documents like this, “intent” and “education as fields can help scholars examine the influences coming from emigres of a certain status. The Skipwith’s letters help to explain both data-wise and qualitatively why the settlements were tainted by many of the same exclusionary and oppressive characteristics common to the United States.
	Reflecting on some of the earlier readings, the importance of information and how the data is captured and prepared resurfaced as data was collected from the letters. In the Flanders and Munoz reading they discuss the curation process of gathering data. “This information is also crucial to curation of data in the sciences. In the humanities, the details are quite different, and the significance of some operations may not be as obvious. Crucial decisions affecting the usability and meaning of humanities data are made at each stage of data creation and management, and the documentation concerning these decisions is likely to be valuable to both future users and curators of the data.” Working through this data set allowed for an evaluation of metadata fields, but more importantly how the documents were being read. The fields “education” or “intent” are critical but highly subjective, how would other scholars understand these terms? Would they interpret them as formally educated when I am examining the legible writing and clarity? Should this metadata field be thoroughly explained in a code book so that scholars understand the assessment behind the field? What about most of the letters where education or intent cannot be gleaned? How to assess thoughts? And how exactly do you use these two fields in scholarship? Those fields while interesting to my research and understanding may not be of best use for the dataset itself. After revisiting the Flanders and Munoz piece, education will either need a clear description of what this means, or it will not be used at all. In the Skipwith letters and the historical background of this family, it is documented that the slaves from the Cocke Plantation in Fluavana County Virginia where they were educated with a “Christian schooling” (how it is phrased in letters). However, only after having done the close reading would one make that connection, most letters do not have this information. 
	In an early reading from Data Feminism, the idea of feminist objectivity was highlighted, and although my research is not feminist inspired, there is a good use in methodological and thinking practices of feminist scholars. Donna Haraway’s idea of “the god trick”, how scholars replicate colonial ideas in tech, comes from a larger argument about the importance of developing feminist objectivity. In her 1988 essay, “Situated Knowledges,” refers to the way that “‘universal truths’ seemed to be generated by disembodied scientists who can observe everything from nowhere.”  Those who are not as closely connected to this research may interact with my data as if they are cold observable facts, which also plays a role in how I prepare the dataset. The letters where the data comes from are in no way stagnant facts, but highly interpretative and have been situated in what I believe is most important for the data set. My reflections on my current progress made me consider how present and inclusive where the people that produced the letters. Where were their voices? How would they respond to the fields and how I have extracted data and made connections? Did some of the ever-present colonial view leak into my perspective? If this data was later visualized in an interactive map or some sort of visual, what would it look like? Although some of these questions cannot be answered, acknowledging them as I work through the data is helpful. However, it is not only data and visualizations that are situated, but scholarship itself is situated knowledge, “they are produced by specific people in specific circumstances— cultural, historical, and geographic.”   Feminist objectivity is a tool that can account for the situated nature of knowledge and can bring together multiple perspectives. For my research the more inclusive the knowledge production is by centering the settlers’ perspectives the closer I can get to the periphery of the black digital letters. Therefore, this dataset and process illuminates the critical importance of omissions and inclusions. I must consciously choose the metadata fields as they pertain to the letters, not necessarily what I believe can be gleaned from reading them. 
	This dataset that charts emigrant letters from the black colonization movement in the early Republic and centers the people, new relationships, and identities to the burgeoning American empire. The data from these letters should tell a story from the black American emigrant perspective that aims to help scholars make connections between the people who migrated, their experiences and their imperial identities. While this dataset is inconclusive of the number of emigrants who wrote home nor the black American experience aboard, it aims to demonstrate the logistical information of colonization. Scholars should see this data in unity within the larger story that contributes to the scholarship on black American colonization by filling the silences found in American imperial historiographies. My research takes a ground-level approach that sees the more significant social implications of the empire through the black colonial settler’s eyes. By stepping back to view the distant less intimate data questions that center relationships between the United States and Liberia can arise. Why did this movement overwhelming target southern black populations? How were so many previously enslaved people able to read and write? Or why did so few free blacks make this journey? A quantitative analysis can then lead scholars to interrogating the imperial historiographies around this topic. Black digital letters move silences around colonization closer to the periphery by focusing almost exclusively on the information gained from the letters. Because the metadata fields stick closely to letters and reveal intricate connections made and maintained by settlers it centers their agency. This view offers new perspectives for our understanding of the early-American Republic by demonstrating that though they left the United States, they held on to connections they previously built, had, or began to make new ones. The settlers may have been in Liberia but their interest was in American business enterprise.
	This project has a longer trajectory as my research and dataset endeavors to untangle the multidimensional African American lived experience in the United States and resituates it in Liberia. This data is the foundation of a larger project that will map black colonization from the early Republic into the twentieth century. The topic of black migration is still underway, while many American history scholars are attuned to the early trans-Atlantic slave trade that proceeded for 400 years, the intra-American trade, and the later great migrations of the twentieth century where thousands of emancipated blacks left the south for the North, this small migratory experience is marginalized. My dataset “Black Digital Letters from Liberia” views black settlers as both hostages and colonial subjects in the Early Republic. Emancipation freed African Americans from their colonial subjecthood, and Black Colonization affirmed their new identity as agents of empire in Liberia, therefore the metadata reveals fields display juxtaposing identities such as, freeperson and previously enslaved. Considering the context of nineteenth-century ideas of race, slavery, and migration. I explore how settlers re-negotiated black identity across the Atlantic and constructed a unique socio-cultural environment that hinged on previous experiences in the west. By examining settlers’ letters and correspondences to family members, slaveholders, and state institutions, among many other records, my research and data locates a transnational nexus of networks that helped to develop the Liberian colony and entrenched western values in their society. 
  
  Works Cited

D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren F. Klein. Data Feminism. MIT Press, 2020.

Flanders, Julia, and Trevor Muñoz. “An Introduction to Humanities Data Curation.” Digital Humanities Data Curation (blog). Accessed May 1, 2022. https://guide.dhcuration.org/contents/intro/.

Haraway, Donna. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective.” Feminist Studies 14, no. 3 (1988): 575–99. 

Tomek, Beverly C. Colonization and Its Discontents: Emancipation, Emigration, and Antislavery in Antebellum Pennsylvania. NYU Press, 2011.

Wiley, Bell Irvin. Slaves No More: Letters From Liberia, 1833-1869. Lexington, Ky.: University Press of Kentucky, 1980.


Data Set Link: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1QUQE597S7vVVd7TXFUnsDZOJMehpKMNNrbl9vZME7gs/edit#gid=0

Digital Code Book: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SpcsurtrE4GEgj6kzpQzDJOOHjGRLWuXWuRRy3Kmhcg/edit


